(DOCSP-26737): C++: Add a Threading page (#2601)
mongodb/docs-realm: source/sdk/cpp/crud/threading.txt

.. _cpp-client-threading:

===========================
Threading - C++ SDK (Alpha)
===========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

To create performant apps, developers must write thread-safe and maintainable
multithreaded code that avoids issues like deadlocking and race conditions.
Realm provides tools specifically designed for this.

.. _cpp-threading-three-rules:

Three Rules to Keep in Mind

> ---------------------------

Reviewer: Took the first because in some cases violating the rules would go beyond unsafe multithreading. Some violations are simply disallowed by Realm altogether.

Realm enables safe multithreaded code when you follow these three rules:

Don't lock to read:
  Realm Database's :ref:`Multiversion Concurrency Control (MVCC) <cpp-mvcc>`
  architecture eliminates the need to lock for read operations. The values you
  read will never be corrupted or in a partially-modified state. You can freely
  read from realms on any thread without the need for locks or mutexes.
  Unnecessarily locking would be a performance bottleneck since each thread
  might need to wait its turn before reading.

> Avoid synchronous writes on the UI thread if you write on a background thread:

Reviewer: I see your point, but I think it's only really a concern if you are in fact using Device Sync or doing something with multithreading. Simple apps that only use Realm as a local data store can get away with writing directly on the UI thread. Then again, at this point, most SDKs offer pretty straightforward async write APIs. I'm not against generalizing this as you suggested.

  synchronous write on the UI thread may result in your app appearing
  unresponsive while it waits for a write on a background thread to complete. If
  you are using :ref:`Device Sync <sync>`, avoid synchronous writes on the UI
  thread as Sync writes on a background thread.

Don't pass live objects, collections, or realms to other threads:
  Live objects, collections, and realm instances are **thread-confined**: that
  is, they are only valid on the thread on which they were created. Practically
  speaking, this means you cannot pass live instances to other threads. However,
  Realm Database offers several mechanisms for :ref:`sharing objects across
  threads <cpp-communication-across-threads>`.

.. _cpp-communication-across-threads:

Communication Across Threads
----------------------------

To access the same realm file from different threads, you must instantiate a
realm instance for every thread of your app. As long as you specify the same
configuration, all realm instances will map to the same file on disk.

One of the key rules when working with Realm Database in a multithreaded
environment is that objects are thread-confined: **you cannot access the

> instances of a realm, collection, or object that originated on other threads.**

Reviewer 2: > you cannot access the instances of a realm, collection, or object that originated on other threads.

This is a strong statement that seems to be untrue? Below, we have a section about `thread_safe_reference` and present it as a way to do precisely what we here say we cannot do.

I'm not sure how to reconcile this and have no idea how `thread_safe_reference` works with MVCC. Maybe it makes sense to introduce `thread_safe_reference` here as an exception?

Reviewer: It is true, but the description of what thread safe reference does is a bit leading. It's more of a way to copy an instance to another thread as if it were created on that other thread.

Realm Database's :ref:`Multiversion Concurrency Control (MVCC) <cpp-mvcc>`
architecture means that there could be many active versions of an object at any
time. Thread-confinement ensures that all instances in that thread are of the
same internal version.

When you need to communicate across threads, you have several options depending
on your use case:

- To modify the data on two threads, :ref:`query <cpp-client-query-engine>`
  for the object on both threads.

- To react to changes made on any thread, use Realm Database's
  :ref:`notifications <cpp-react-to-changes>`.

> - To see changes from other threads in the realm on the current

Reviewer: What I'm trying to say here is:
>To see [changes that happened on another thread] in [the realm on the current thread]

And I don't think your suggestion quite captures it...

  thread, :ref:`refresh <cpp-refreshing-realms>` your realm instance.

- To share an instance of a realm or specific object with another thread, 
  share a :ref:`thread_safe_reference <cpp-thread-safe-reference>` to the 
  realm or object.

.. _cpp-thread-safe-reference:

Pass Instances Across Threads
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instances of ``realm::realm``, ``realm::results``, and ``realm::object`` (when

> managed) are *thread-confined*. That means you may only use them on the thread

Reviewer 2: > (when managed)

Just checking that our expected audience will know what this means. We don't mention int anywhere else on the page.

where you created them.

You can pass thread-confined instances to another thread as follows:

1. Initialize a :cpp-sdk:`thread_safe_reference 
   <structrealm_1_1thread__safe__reference_3_01db_3_01Ts_8_8_8_01_4_01_4.html>` 
   with the thread-confined object.
#. Pass the reference to the other thread or queue.
#. Resolve the reference on the other thread. If the referred object is a realm
   instance, resolve it by calling ``.resolve()``; otherwise, move the reference
   to ``realm.resolve()``. Use the returned object as normal.

.. important::

   You must resolve a ``thread_safe_reference`` exactly once. Otherwise,
   the source realm will remain pinned until the reference gets
   deallocated. For this reason, ``thread_safe_reference`` should be
   short-lived.

.. literalinclude:: /examples/generated/cpp/threading.snippet.thread-safe-reference.cpp
    :language: cpp

Another way to work with an object on another thread is to query for it
again on that thread. But if the object does not have a primary
key, it is not trivial to query for it. You can use ``thread_safe_reference`` 
on any object, regardless of whether it has a primary key. You can also 

> use it with lists and results.

Reviewer 2: > You can also use it with lists and results.

I think we should make this clearer earlier in the section.

Reviewer: I'll just remove the line. The point being made here was that lists and results don't have a handle (like a primary key) so fetching them again on the other thread could be complex. We already enumerate the things you can use this with earlier.

.. _ios-use-realm-across-threads:

Use the Same Realm Across Threads
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You cannot share realm instances across threads.

Reviewer 2: Except with `thread_safe_reference`, right?

Reviewer: No. Need to clarify that thread-safe references just copy instances to the other thread. You aren't using the same instance across threads.

To use the same Realm file across threads, open a different realm instance on
each thread. As long as you use the same :cpp-sdk:`configuration
<structrealm_1_1internal_1_1bridge_1_1realm_1_1config.html>`, all Realm
instances will map to the same file on disk.

.. _cpp-scheduler-thread-management:

Schedulers (Run Loops)
----------------------

Some platforms or frameworks automatically set up a **scheduler** (or **run
loop**), which continuously processes events during the lifetime of your

> program. The Realm C++ SDK detects and uses schedulers on the following

Reviewer 2: We use "app" in the rest of the page.

```suggestion
app. The Realm C++ SDK detects and uses schedulers on the following
```

   versions becoming "pinned", preventing Realm from reusing the disk space used
   by that version and leading to larger file sizes. 

.. _cpp-mvcc:

Realm's Threading Model in Depth
--------------------------------

Realm Database provides safe, fast, lock-free, and concurrent access
across threads with its :wikipedia:`Multiversion Concurrency
Control (MVCC) <Multiversion_concurrency_control>`
architecture.

Compared and Contrasted with Git
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you are familiar with a distributed version control
system like `Git <https://git-scm.com/>`__, you may already
have an intuitive understanding of MVCC. Two fundamental
elements of Git are:

- Commits, which are atomic writes.
- Branches, which are different versions of the commit history.

Similarly, Realm Database has atomically-committed writes in the form
of transactions. Realm Database also has many different versions of the 
history at any given time, like branches.

Unlike Git, which actively supports distribution and
divergence through forking, a realm only has one true latest
version at any given time and always writes to the head of
that latest version. Realm Database cannot write to a previous

> version. This makes sense: your data should converge on one

Reviewer 2: We shouldn't presume to know what makes sense to readers.

```suggestion
version. This means your data converges on one
```

configuration, all realm instances will map to the same file on disk.

One of the key rules when working with Realm Database in a multithreaded
environment is that objects are thread-confined: **you cannot access the
instances of a realm, collection, or object that originated on other threads.**
Realm Database's :ref:`Multiversion Concurrency Control (MVCC) <cpp-mvcc>`
architecture means that there could be many active versions of an object at any
time. Thread-confinement ensures that all instances in that thread are of the
same internal version.

When you need to communicate across threads, you have several options depending
on your use case:

- To modify the data on two threads, :ref:`query <cpp-client-query-engine>`
  for the object on both threads.

- To react to changes made on any thread, use Realm Database's
  :ref:`notifications <cpp-react-to-changes>`.

- To see changes from other threads in the realm on the current
  thread, :ref:`refresh <cpp-refreshing-realms>` your realm instance.

- To share an instance of a realm or specific object with another thread, 
  share a :ref:`thread_safe_reference <cpp-thread-safe-reference>` to the 
  realm or object.

> .. TODO: Add a bullet about the scheduler https://www.mongodb.com/docs/realm-sdks/cpp/latest/structrealm_1_1platform__default__scheduler.html#a96336dad0a9ee38af907cb7c9bed4870

Author: Is there something we should say here about the scheduler - i.e. "To schedule realm transactions on a specific run loop, something something scheduler."

Reviewer: Oops, I meant to remove this comment. I don't think so. I think the scheduler has a bit more to do with how threads/tasks/events are dispatched/handled, and we would use the other mechanisms more directly.
